The greatest risk to life on Earth as we know it is not terrorists, and it is not climate change.  It is something far more subtle.  The greatest risk to life on Earth is Power Without Wisdom.  

Our advancing technology increases out power to change the world around us.  But do we make the best choices regarding how we use this power?  Frequently not.  Here's why:

For our purposes, we can define "Wisdom" as "Information, gained through experience, about what works and what doesn't."  Wisdom is different from intelligence.  You can have intelligence without wisdom, and wisdom without intelligence. For our purposes, let's define "intelligence" as a process of determining what is true, based upon reasoning.  Wisdom, on the other hand, is a process for determining what is true, based upon experience.

Wisdom is the operative force behind evolution.  Each organism is an experiment.  If the organism manages to reproduce itself, the experiment is considered a success, and its DNA is passed on to its progeny.  Thus, evolution is a grand experiment in what works and what does not work.  Evolution is a process of wisdom.  There is VAST wisdom in nature, and in the "engineering" of all the organisms that we share the planet with, and of our own physical bodies.

Intelligence, on the other hand, is the source of all our technology - the reason we are living in houses and communicating on smartphones, rather than running naked through the bushes.  It is absolutely valid to consider it a source of truth.  But it is NOT a source of wisdom, and can be used in ways that are VERY unwise!

Consider our journey with smart phones, for example.  At first, we were mesmerized by all the cool things they could do for us (and we still are, to a large degree).  At first, we had no idea about possible negative consequences of smart phone use.  Because smart phones were new, we had not yet had sufficient time to develop wisdom about them.  Now, we know a lot more about both the helpful and not-so-helpful aspects of smart phone use.  For example, neurological effects of too much screen time on young children.  Or neck problems due to the amount of time we spend looking down at our phones.  This example is typical of our process with any new technology.  At first, we embrace it with naiive excitement.  After we use it for a while, we develop some wisdom about it - both unexpected benefits and also unintended consequences.  This is what we do with any new technology that comes along.

This is especially important to be aware of with new technologies such as AI.  AI will likely become the most powerful new technology ever developed.  Through AI, we have the ability to automate both good works and bad ones, as well as careless ones fraught with unintended consequences.  A good part of The Music of Systems will be to explore AI and its implications, and how we can use AI going forward, with greater wisdom than we might otherwise.

Coming soon:

Can an AI model be used to generate wisdom?

Can the Internet be a source of wisdom?

